Once around green pea galaxies.
So if you haven't yet watched the one
about little red dots, I recommend you
go and watch that one first, but
hopefully you'll enjoy both of them. And
it doesn't really matter which way round
you go. Little green peas are images
that were discovered in the Sloan
Digital Sky Survey. small green blobs in
the uh picture of all the galaxies that
this was discovering across the sky. And
the real discovery is attributed to the
citizen science program Galaxy Zoo.
Galaxy Zoo was a program set up to show
millions of images of galaxies and ask
individual uh people via the internet to
comment upon them to classify them to
say which way they thought they were
rotating and what type of galaxy they
were because the human eye was so much
better at doing this back in 2007 to
2009. Nowadays, perhaps we might find a
way of using AI to do it, but who knows?
Anyway, in addition to classifying all
the things that obviously look like
galaxies,
Galaxy Zoo's users revealed the presence
of a significant number of little green
blobs, and they soon acquired the
nickname of green peas. Here's 80 of
them. and they really do look green and
they really do look like somewhat
indistinct blobs. Um,
we think these are small galaxies
estimated to be up to about 16,000 light
years in diameter and so larger by a
factor of 30 than the little red dots.
Please go and see the little red dots
video if you haven't seen it. And uh so
these are perhaps a later stage in the
story of galaxies.
We think these are about 3 billion solar
masses which is 500 times less than the
1.5 trillion of the Milky Way. So still
dwarf galaxies by any standard. Yet
fascinatingly they are forming stars at
a prodigious rate. The star formation in
a typical green P is around 10 solar
masses worth per year and in the Milky
Way it's somewhere in the range of one
to two solar masses per year. So this is
five to 10 times more uh star formation
despite the fact there's 500 times less
mass. So these are incredibly active
formers of stars for their size. And the
picture on the right is a Chandra X-ray
image overlaid on a visible image
showing a lot of that um X-ray emission
and a lot of the dotty nature of some of
these GPS when you zoom in to really
high resolution.
Now the spectrum of them is fascinating.
The spectrum on the right is actually
the two green lines are GPS, green P's.
And then we've got some other red
galaxies for comparison, but that's the
infrared near infrared part of the
spectrum. The green color itself comes
from a lot of oxygen that is ionized
atomic oxygen, doubly ionized oxygen
emitting at the 500 nanometer wave in
the visible part of the spectrum. So not
the spectrum that we're looking at here.
And that uh color is the so-called
nebulum color, the same color that we
see in the airglow of the aurora. Um and
uh puzzled scientists for many years as
to what it was can only occur in a very
very thin gas in a near vacuum state.
Otherwise, it's what's known as a
forbidden line transform in quantum
mechanics. So that it actually is a very
rare transition and takes a long time.
And if you're in a reasonably dense gas,
the chances are that you'll collide and
dump the energy through collisions
rather than emitting the green line. You
have to be hanging around in a vacuum
not meeting any other molecules for a
long time to stand a decent chance of
giving out a green photon in the 500
nanometer band. Um, hence it really only
happens in incredibly thin gas.
So these GPS, they're from a time when
the universe was only 3/4 of its current
age. Um, and these are still forming
stars at 5 to 10 times the rate of the
Milky Way despite being smaller. So this
is quite a prodigious source of new
stars and it suggests this was an early
phase of the evolution of galaxies. And
the image at the bottom there is black
and white image of a number of these
GPS, these green peas, um, taken with
the Hubble Space Telescope in very high
resolution. So you can see there seem to
be a couple of them interacting with
each other, some merges going on and so
forth. So definitely a very active stage
of galaxy formation.
Now, since the discovery of the GPS, the
green peas, we have BB's, blueberries.
Here are uh another Sloan Digital Sky
Survey image of a whole lot of blue dots
that were discovered, the so-called
blueberries. And these are relatively
young that just in the last 70 million
years or so that these galaxies seem to
have come into existence. Um, and
they're quite unusual. They are
significantly fainter than the GPS and
much smaller, 1 3,000th the size of the
Milky Way. So very tiny indeed, but
still forming a lot of stars, although
mostly they seem to be forming very
small stars. I guess with not much mass,
it's much harder to get together enough
material to form giant stars.
They're also very metal poor and some of
them are the most metal poor galaxies
that we know in the local universe. Of
course, we're only seeing these in the
local universe because the local
universe is the only bit we can see in
the modern epoch. If you look a long way
away, you're in inevitably looking back
in time at the universe as was.
And these also seem to exist only in
what we would call low density
environments well isolated from nearer
larger neighbors. So it's a low density
general regions of the universe where
these tiny little uh blueberries are
forming and have been forming recently.
So again, amazing to see what we are
learning about the early stages of these
very small galaxies emerging and the
fact that these guys are coming into
existence in the modern universe.
And in addition to the green peas and
the blueberries, we have little blue
dots. There's a paper published in um
2017 I think it was called Little Blue
Dots the Hubble Space Telescope Frontier
Fields precursors to globular clusters.
And these little blue dots are even less
massive than the blueberries. So very
very tiny indeed. And these are forming
stars very rapidly and have seemed to
have come into existence in just the
last 1% of the age of the universe. And
it's quite probable that these are the
source of many of the globular clusters.
So perhaps we're looking at the origin
of these little micro galaxies that we
now see as globular clusters.
And just to complete the zoo, we have
purple grapes, PGs. Uh these are halfway
in distance and age between the GPS and
the BBS. Gosh, this gets confusing,
doesn't it? Um but again, it's really
showing that we have a spectrum of
different stages of the
uh growth and evolution of galaxies,
showing that they grow from the inside
out. starting with a seed and growing
larger and larger as more material is
pulled in and makes the galaxy extent
grow. Plus, of course, forming that
black hole in the center. And there's
lots more detail behind this behind the
spectrum and the colors and what's going
on. But it's a fascinating read and uh
there are a lot of things that are not
yet understood. So, I think uh maybe
we'll revisit this one at some point in
the future and try and fill in some of
the blanks in our understanding of
exactly what's going on. But for now,
thanks very much for listening and I'll
see you on the next one.